
###
## Create and manage alerts in Splunk
Introduction
In this tutorial, we will learn how to create and manage alerts in Splunk.
Prerequisite:
we are using the same data that we used in the previous tutorial. You can get it Here!
In case you missed the part where we are preparing your Data kindly follow this part Here

1- Uploading Data

On the Splunk home page: Click on Add Data
Click on Upload
Click on Select file and upload the file secure.log which is in the www1 folder
Click on Next
For the name of the source type put secure and Click on Save
In Host field value let's put linux-secure
Let's create a new index for the secure log data: click on Create a new index
In the Index Name field, put the value security as index and click on save.
Click on review, then click on submit.
2- Create a scheduled alert in Splunk
A scheduled alert is an alert that runs on a regular interval, making it a type of scheduled search. You can specify the schedule and trigger conditions, and you can define the alert actions that take place when the alert is triggered.
let’s go…
At this point click on start searching
In the search bar, type the following command to get all events containing the words "failed" and "password".


source="secure.log" host="unix-secure" index="security" sourcetype="secure" failed password


From the result page, click on Save As select Alert
Give the name of the alert: Login failure alert
Change the value of the time when the alert will expire and put 7 days
Change the value to is greater than 30 this means the system will send you an alert when the number of events is greater than 30.

Figure 1: Creating an Alert Part1
Click on Add action and set the priority to High, Finally click on save



Figure 2: Creating an Alert Part2


Click on Permissions

Figure 3: setting permissions
Let’s keep everything as default and click Save
You are now taken to your Alerts page where you can see details of your alert settings and edit them by clicking the link next to them.
Figure 4: Alert page

Click on the Alert menu you will see all the created alerts.
3- Create a real-time alert in Splunk
A type of alert that searches for events continuously in real-time. Real-time alerts can trigger alert actions on a per-result basis. They can also trigger alert actions when results meet user-defined conditions within a rolling time window.
Click on searching and reporting
Click on Data Summary
Click on Sources, type secure in the search bar and select /var/log/secure
Now you are in the search menu. In the search bar, type this command

host=splunk source="/var/log/secure" sourcetype=linux_secure Authentication failure



Click on Save As select Alert
Give the title of the alert: Authentication failure alert
Set the alert type to Real-time.
Set Expires value to 3 days
Click on Add Actions and select Add to Triggered Alerts, Click on it and set severity on Critical
Finally, click on Save.



Figure 5: real-time alert
Click on Alert in the menu bar, your two alerts are there. Great Job!
let’s go back to Visual Studio code
Log in on the Splunk server through SSH
Type the command su
Enter anything as the password until you get an Authentication failure
Go back to the Splunk server web interface, open the Alert menu
Click on the Authentication failure alert that you set earlier!
Do you see your Alert? Say yes!



Click on Views Results if you want to get more results.
Congratulations, be proud of you, now you can set up an alert on Splunk. Good job!!!!
Destroy the infrastructure
Once you have done with this tutorial, you need to destroy the infrastructure to avoid more charges from AWS.
Go back to visual studio code
cd in the directory where we created instances (~/splunk/splunk-terraform-1)
run the command: terraform destroy -auto-approve
Conclusion


In this tutorial, you learn learned how to create schedule alerts and real-time alerts.

